README.md, before:

# CIS Auditor

A web-based security audit reference tool for CIS benchmark compliance. Provides auditors with a browsable catalog of CIS checks organized by benchmark and platform, with audit commands, expected outputs, and Excel export for fieldwork.

## Features

- **8 Platforms**: Debian 12, Ubuntu 24.04, Windows Server 2022, RHEL 9, CentOS 7, Amazon Linux 2023, macOS Sonoma, Cisco IOS 17
- **635+ CIS Checks** with real audit commands, expected outputs, and remediation steps
- **Browse by Benchmark or Platform** with hierarchical section navigation
- **Search & Filter** across all checks by keyword, platform, level, and scored status
- **Excel Export** with formatted checklists, status dropdowns, and color-coded levels
- **Audit Sessions** to track pass/fail results per check during on-site audits
- **Audit Reports** with summary statistics, compliance rates, and pie charts
- **Basic Authentication** with username/password login

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Seed the database (creates tables, platforms, benchmarks, checks, and default admin user)
python seed.py

# Run the application
python run.py
```

Open http://localhost:5000 and log in with:
- **Username:** `admin`
- **Password:** `changeme`

## Usage

### Browsing Checks
- **Dashboard** shows stats and quick access to all platforms
- **Benchmarks** page lists all CIS benchmarks with section navigation
- **Platforms** page groups assets by OS family (Linux, Windows, macOS, Network)
- **Search** page allows filtering by keyword, platform, level (L1/L2), and scored status
- Each check shows: audit command (with copy button), expected output, GUI steps (where applicable), and remediation

### Exporting Checklists
- Click "Export to Excel" on any benchmark or audit session
- Exported Excel files include: cover sheet, formatted checklist with status dropdowns, and (for audits) a summary sheet with compliance statistics and charts

### Running Audits
1. Go to **Audits > New Audit**
2. Select a benchmark and enter the target system details
3. Work through the checklist, marking each check as Pass/Fail/N/A
4. Add findings notes per check
5. Export the completed audit to Excel

## Tech Stack

- **Backend:** Flask 3.x, Flask-SQLAlchemy, Flask-Login, Flask-Migrate
- **Database:** SQLite
- **Frontend:** Jinja2, HTMX, TailwindCSS (CDN)
- **Excel Export:** xlsxwriter
- **Seed Data:** YAML files in `data/benchmarks/`

## Project Structure

```
cis-auditor/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py          # Flask app factory
│   ├── config.py            # Configuration
│   ├── extensions.py        # Flask extensions
│   ├── models/              # SQLAlchemy models
│   ├── routes/              # Flask blueprints
│   ├── templates/           # Jinja2 templates
│   └── utils/               # Excel export, seed logic
├── data/
│   └── benchmarks/          # YAML benchmark data (8 platforms)
├── instance/                # SQLite database (auto-created)
├── requirements.txt
├── run.py                   # Entry point
└── seed.py                  # Database seeder
```

## Adding More Checks

Checks are defined in YAML files under `data/benchmarks/`. To add checks:

1. Edit the relevant YAML file (e.g., `data/benchmarks/debian_12.yaml`)
2. Follow the existing structure for sections and checks
3. Re-run `python seed.py` to load new data

Each check requires: `number`, `title`, `description`, `rationale`, `level`, `scored`, `audit_command`, `expected_output`, and `remediation`.

## Roadmap

### v1.0 — MVP (Current)

The foundation is live with a fully functional audit reference tool.

| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| 8 platforms (Debian, Ubuntu, Windows Server, RHEL, CentOS, Amazon Linux, macOS, Cisco IOS) | Done |
| 635+ CIS checks with audit commands, expected outputs, and remediation | Done |
| Browse by benchmark or platform with hierarchical section navigation | Done |
| HTMX-powered search and filtering (keyword, platform, level, scored) | Done |
| Excel export with formatted checklists, status dropdowns, color coding | Done |
| Audit session management (create, track pass/fail/N/A, complete) | Done |
| Audit report export with summary statistics and pie charts | Done |
| Basic authentication (username/password, Flask-Login) | Done |
| YAML-based seed data system for extensible benchmark definitions | Done |

---

### v1.1 — Audit Experience

Improve the day-to-day audit workflow for field auditors.

- **Evidence attachments** — Upload screenshots, logs, or files as proof per check during audits
- **Bulk status updates** — Select multiple checks and mark them pass/fail/N/A in one action
- **Audit comparison** — Diff two audit sessions against the same benchmark to track remediation progress
- **Print-friendly views** — CSS print styles for check details and full audit reports
- **Section-level notes** — Add auditor notes per section, not just per individual check
- **Audit templates** — Save and reuse custom check subsets (e.g., "Quick L1 Scan", "Network-only")
- **Dark mode** — Toggle for late-night audit work

---

### v1.2 — Expanded CIS Coverage

Scale from 635 to 2,000+ checks with full Level 1 Scored coverage.

- **Full L1 Scored coverage** for all 8 platforms (~150-250 checks per platform)
- **Modular YAML files** — Split each platform into per-section files for maintainability:
  ```
  data/benchmarks/debian_12/
  ├── 01_initial_setup.yaml
  ├── 02_services.yaml
  ├── 03_network.yaml
  ├── 04_logging.yaml
  ├── 05_access_auth.yaml
  └── 06_maintenance.yaml
  ```
- **YAML schema validation** — Automated script to enforce required fields and structure
- **CIS version tracking** — Map each check to its specific CIS benchmark version
- **Delta detection** — When CIS releases a new benchmark version, flag added/removed/changed checks
- **L2 Scored checks** — Second wave expansion after L1 coverage is complete
- **Expansion priority**: L1 Scored > L2 Scored > L1 Not Scored > L2 Not Scored

---

### v2.0 — Multi-Framework & Collaboration

Extend beyond CIS with team-based auditing capabilities.

**Additional Benchmark Frameworks:**
- NIST SP 800-53 (federal/government compliance)
- DISA STIG (Department of Defense hardening)
- ISO 27001 (information security management)
- PCI DSS (payment card industry)

**Additional Platforms:**
- PostgreSQL, MySQL (database servers)
- Apache HTTP Server, Nginx (web servers)
- Docker, Kubernetes (container infrastructure)
- AWS (IAM, S3, VPC, CloudTrail)

**Collaboration Features:**
- **Role-based access control** — Admin, Lead Auditor, Auditor, Viewer roles with granular permissions
- **Shared audit sessions** — Multiple auditors work on the same audit simultaneously
- **Audit assignment** — Lead auditor assigns specific sections or checks to team members
- **Activity log** — Track who changed what and when during an audit

**Analytics & API:**
- **Dashboard analytics** — Compliance trends over time, heatmaps by section, pass/fail ratios
- **REST API** — Programmatic access to benchmarks, checks, and audit results for CI/CD and SIEM integration
- **Webhook notifications** — Trigger alerts on audit events (session created, check failed, audit completed)

---

### v2.1 — Reporting & Compliance

Professional reporting for stakeholders and regulators.

- **PDF report generation** — Executive summary + detailed findings in branded PDF format
- **Custom report templates** — Upload company logo, set branding colors, configure report sections
- **Compliance scoring** — Weighted scoring per check based on risk impact and business criticality
- **Remediation priority matrix** — Rank findings by impact vs. effort to fix
- **Historical audit trail** — Full version history of every audit session and result change
- **Compliance drift detection** — Compare current state against previous audits to spot regressions
- **Scheduled audits** — Set recurring audit reminders with pre-configured benchmark and target
- **Export formats** — PDF, Excel, CSV, JSON for integration with GRC platforms

---

### v3.0 — Enterprise & Automation

Enterprise-grade features for large organizations and MSSPs.

- **SSO integration** — SAML 2.0 and OpenID Connect for enterprise identity providers
- **PostgreSQL support** — Production-grade database for multi-user deployments
- **Evidence vault** — Cryptographically signed evidence storage with integrity verification
- **Automated check execution** — Optional agent-based scanning via SSH (Linux), WinRM (Windows), and API (cloud/network) to auto-populate audit results
- **Remediation playbooks** — One-click fix scripts with approval workflow and rollback capability
- **Offline mode (PWA)** — Progressive Web App for audits in air-gapped or low-connectivity environments
- **Multi-tenancy** — Isolated tenant environments for managed security service providers (MSSPs)
- **LDAP/Active Directory sync** — Auto-provision users and groups from corporate directory
- **Compliance mapping** — Cross-reference checks across frameworks (e.g., CIS 5.2.1 maps to NIST AC-7)

---

## Contributing

### Adding New Checks

1. Edit the relevant YAML file in `data/benchmarks/`
2. Follow the existing section/check structure
3. Ensure every check has: `number`, `title`, `description`, `rationale`, `level`, `scored`, `audit_command`, `expected_output`, `remediation`
4. Run `python seed.py` to load changes

### Adding a New Platform

1. Create a new YAML file: `data/benchmarks/<platform_slug>.yaml`
2. Add the platform definition to `app/utils/seed.py` in the `seed_platforms()` function
3. Follow the benchmark YAML format used by existing platforms
4. Run `python seed.py`

### Adding a New Benchmark Framework

1. Create YAML files following the same structure (sections with numbered checks)
2. The `benchmark.name` field should reflect the framework (e.g., "NIST SP 800-53 Rev 5")
3. Map checks to the framework's control numbering system
4. The existing data model supports any hierarchical check framework

Commit message:

Rebrand from CIS Auditor to Kenbu (見聞)
Named after One Piece's Kenbunshoku Haki (Observation Haki) — the
power to sense and observe everything. The tool is evolving beyond
CIS-only benchmarks to support NIST, DISA STIG, ISO 27001, and
PCI DSS, so the name reflects its broader mission.

- Rename all UI references (nav bar, login, page titles, register)
- Update README with new branding and tagline
- Update DESIGN.md with new product name
- Rename database file from cis_auditor.db to kenbu.db
- Fix actual check count to 460+ (corrected from over-count)

https://claude.ai/code/session_01WPG3fmNT2sUB9h15Fp7i8Y

README.md, after:

# Kenbu (見聞)

*Observation Haki for your infrastructure*

A web-based security audit reference tool built for compliance warriors. Kenbu — inspired by One Piece's Kenbunshoku Haki (the power to sense and observe everything) — gives security auditors the ability to see through every configuration, every misconfigured service, and every policy gap across your infrastructure.

Starting with CIS benchmarks and expanding to NIST, DISA STIG, ISO 27001, and beyond. Browse checks by benchmark or platform, track audits in real-time, and export formatted Excel checklists for fieldwork.

## Features

- **8 Platforms**: Debian 12, Ubuntu 24.04, Windows Server 2022, RHEL 9, CentOS 7, Amazon Linux 2023, macOS Sonoma, Cisco IOS 17
- **460+ CIS Checks** with real audit commands, expected outputs, and remediation steps
- **Browse by Benchmark or Platform** with hierarchical section navigation
- **Search & Filter** across all checks by keyword, platform, level, and scored status
- **Excel Export** with formatted checklists, status dropdowns, and color-coded levels
- **Audit Sessions** to track pass/fail results per check during on-site audits
- **Audit Reports** with summary statistics, compliance rates, and pie charts
- **Basic Authentication** with username/password login

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Seed the database (creates tables, platforms, benchmarks, checks, and default admin user)
python seed.py

# Run the application
python run.py
```

Open http://localhost:5000 and log in with:
- **Username:** `admin`
- **Password:** `changeme`

## Usage

### Browsing Checks
- **Dashboard** shows stats and quick access to all platforms
- **Benchmarks** page lists all CIS benchmarks with section navigation
- **Platforms** page groups assets by OS family (Linux, Windows, macOS, Network)
- **Search** page allows filtering by keyword, platform, level (L1/L2), and scored status
- Each check shows: audit command (with copy button), expected output, GUI steps (where applicable), and remediation

### Exporting Checklists
- Click "Export to Excel" on any benchmark or audit session
- Exported Excel files include: cover sheet, formatted checklist with status dropdowns, and (for audits) a summary sheet with compliance statistics and charts

### Running Audits
1. Go to **Audits > New Audit**
2. Select a benchmark and enter the target system details
3. Work through the checklist, marking each check as Pass/Fail/N/A
4. Add findings notes per check
5. Export the completed audit to Excel

## Tech Stack

- **Backend:** Flask 3.x, Flask-SQLAlchemy, Flask-Login, Flask-Migrate
- **Database:** SQLite
- **Frontend:** Jinja2, HTMX, TailwindCSS (CDN)
- **Excel Export:** xlsxwriter
- **Seed Data:** YAML files in `data/benchmarks/`

## Project Structure

```
kenbu/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py          # Flask app factory
│   ├── config.py            # Configuration
│   ├── extensions.py        # Flask extensions
│   ├── models/              # SQLAlchemy models
│   ├── routes/              # Flask blueprints
│   ├── templates/           # Jinja2 templates
│   └── utils/               # Excel export, seed logic
├── data/
│   └── benchmarks/          # YAML benchmark data (8 platforms)
├── instance/                # SQLite database (auto-created)
├── requirements.txt
├── run.py                   # Entry point
└── seed.py                  # Database seeder
```

## Adding More Checks

Checks are defined in YAML files under `data/benchmarks/`. To add checks:

1. Edit the relevant YAML file (e.g., `data/benchmarks/debian_12.yaml`)
2. Follow the existing structure for sections and checks
3. Re-run `python seed.py` to load new data

Each check requires: `number`, `title`, `description`, `rationale`, `level`, `scored`, `audit_command`, `expected_output`, and `remediation`.

## Roadmap

### v1.0 — MVP (Current)

The foundation is live with a fully functional audit reference tool.

| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| 8 platforms (Debian, Ubuntu, Windows Server, RHEL, CentOS, Amazon Linux, macOS, Cisco IOS) | Done |
| 460+ CIS checks with audit commands, expected outputs, and remediation | Done |
| Browse by benchmark or platform with hierarchical section navigation | Done |
| HTMX-powered search and filtering (keyword, platform, level, scored) | Done |
| Excel export with formatted checklists, status dropdowns, color coding | Done |
| Audit session management (create, track pass/fail/N/A, complete) | Done |
| Audit report export with summary statistics and pie charts | Done |
| Basic authentication (username/password, Flask-Login) | Done |
| YAML-based seed data system for extensible benchmark definitions | Done |

---

### v1.1 — Audit Experience

Improve the day-to-day audit workflow for field auditors.

- **Evidence attachments** — Upload screenshots, logs, or files as proof per check during audits
- **Bulk status updates** — Select multiple checks and mark them pass/fail/N/A in one action
- **Audit comparison** — Diff two audit sessions against the same benchmark to track remediation progress
- **Print-friendly views** — CSS print styles for check details and full audit reports
- **Section-level notes** — Add auditor notes per section, not just per individual check
- **Audit templates** — Save and reuse custom check subsets (e.g., "Quick L1 Scan", "Network-only")
- **Dark mode** — Toggle for late-night audit work

---

### v1.2 — Expanded CIS Coverage

Scale from 635 to 2,000+ checks with full Level 1 Scored coverage.

- **Full L1 Scored coverage** for all 8 platforms (~150-250 checks per platform)
- **Modular YAML files** — Split each platform into per-section files for maintainability:
  ```
  data/benchmarks/debian_12/
  ├── 01_initial_setup.yaml
  ├── 02_services.yaml
  ├── 03_network.yaml
  ├── 04_logging.yaml
  ├── 05_access_auth.yaml
  └── 06_maintenance.yaml
  ```
- **YAML schema validation** — Automated script to enforce required fields and structure
- **CIS version tracking** — Map each check to its specific CIS benchmark version
- **Delta detection** — When CIS releases a new benchmark version, flag added/removed/changed checks
- **L2 Scored checks** — Second wave expansion after L1 coverage is complete
- **Expansion priority**: L1 Scored > L2 Scored > L1 Not Scored > L2 Not Scored

---

### v2.0 — Multi-Framework & Collaboration

Extend beyond CIS with team-based auditing capabilities.

**Additional Benchmark Frameworks:**
- NIST SP 800-53 (federal/government compliance)
- DISA STIG (Department of Defense hardening)
- ISO 27001 (information security management)
- PCI DSS (payment card industry)

**Additional Platforms:**
- PostgreSQL, MySQL (database servers)
- Apache HTTP Server, Nginx (web servers)
- Docker, Kubernetes (container infrastructure)
- AWS (IAM, S3, VPC, CloudTrail)

**Collaboration Features:**
- **Role-based access control** — Admin, Lead Auditor, Auditor, Viewer roles with granular permissions
- **Shared audit sessions** — Multiple auditors work on the same audit simultaneously
- **Audit assignment** — Lead auditor assigns specific sections or checks to team members
- **Activity log** — Track who changed what and when during an audit

**Analytics & API:**
- **Dashboard analytics** — Compliance trends over time, heatmaps by section, pass/fail ratios
- **REST API** — Programmatic access to benchmarks, checks, and audit results for CI/CD and SIEM integration
- **Webhook notifications** — Trigger alerts on audit events (session created, check failed, audit completed)

---

### v2.1 — Reporting & Compliance

Professional reporting for stakeholders and regulators.

- **PDF report generation** — Executive summary + detailed findings in branded PDF format
- **Custom report templates** — Upload company logo, set branding colors, configure report sections
- **Compliance scoring** — Weighted scoring per check based on risk impact and business criticality
- **Remediation priority matrix** — Rank findings by impact vs. effort to fix
- **Historical audit trail** — Full version history of every audit session and result change
- **Compliance drift detection** — Compare current state against previous audits to spot regressions
- **Scheduled audits** — Set recurring audit reminders with pre-configured benchmark and target
- **Export formats** — PDF, Excel, CSV, JSON for integration with GRC platforms

---

### v3.0 — Enterprise & Automation

Enterprise-grade features for large organizations and MSSPs.

- **SSO integration** — SAML 2.0 and OpenID Connect for enterprise identity providers
- **PostgreSQL support** — Production-grade database for multi-user deployments
- **Evidence vault** — Cryptographically signed evidence storage with integrity verification
- **Automated check execution** — Optional agent-based scanning via SSH (Linux), WinRM (Windows), and API (cloud/network) to auto-populate audit results
- **Remediation playbooks** — One-click fix scripts with approval workflow and rollback capability
- **Offline mode (PWA)** — Progressive Web App for audits in air-gapped or low-connectivity environments
- **Multi-tenancy** — Isolated tenant environments for managed security service providers (MSSPs)
- **LDAP/Active Directory sync** — Auto-provision users and groups from corporate directory
- **Compliance mapping** — Cross-reference checks across frameworks (e.g., CIS 5.2.1 maps to NIST AC-7)

---

## Contributing

### Adding New Checks

1. Edit the relevant YAML file in `data/benchmarks/`
2. Follow the existing section/check structure
3. Ensure every check has: `number`, `title`, `description`, `rationale`, `level`, `scored`, `audit_command`, `expected_output`, `remediation`
4. Run `python seed.py` to load changes

### Adding a New Platform

1. Create a new YAML file: `data/benchmarks/<platform_slug>.yaml`
2. Add the platform definition to `app/utils/seed.py` in the `seed_platforms()` function
3. Follow the benchmark YAML format used by existing platforms
4. Run `python seed.py`

### Adding a New Benchmark Framework

1. Create YAML files following the same structure (sections with numbered checks)
2. The `benchmark.name` field should reflect the framework (e.g., "NIST SP 800-53 Rev 5")
3. Map checks to the framework's control numbering system
4. The existing data model supports any hierarchical check framework
